>> Woodruff: THE LEADER OF THE
ISLAMIC STATE SPEAKS R THFOE
FIRST TIME SINCE REPORTS HE
MIGHT HAVE BEEN KILLED.
AS THE U.S. DEBATES ITS NEXT
PLAN OF ATTACK.
GOOD EVENING, I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
>> Ifill: AND I'M GWEN IFILL.
ALSO AHEAD THIS THURSDAY, ONLINE
GIANT AMAZON STRIKES A DEAL WITH
PUBLISHING COMPANY HACHETTE OVER
THE PRICE OF PRINT AND DIGITAL
BOOKS.
>> Woodruff: ALASKA'S PUSH TO
KEEP TEACHERS FROM LEAVING
REMOTE AREAS.
>> Ifill: PLUS, TWO UNLIKELY
HEROES TEAM UP TO MAKE A TEEN
ZOMBIE MOVIE.
>> IT WILL BE THE GREATEST MOVIE
EVER.
>> WHY?
>> IT'S GOING TO BE AWESOME.
>> BECAUSE THE MOVIE HAS BETRTE
ACTION.
BETTER ACTION, BETTER SEX, AND
BETTER ROMANCE.
>> Woodruff: THOSE ARE SOME OF
THE STORIES WE'RE COVERING ON
TONIGHT'S PBS NEWSHOUR.
>> Ifill: PRESIDENT OBAMA AND
REPUBLICANS IN CONGRESS MOVED
CLOSER TO CONFRONTATION TODAY
OVER IMMIGRATION REFORM.
THERE WAS WORD THE PRESIDENT
WILLSSUE I AN EXECUTIVE ORDER AS
EARLY AS NEXT WEEK.
"THE NEW YORK TIMES" REPORTED HE
PLANS TO SHIELD UP TO FIVE
MILLION UNDOCUMENTED IMMIGRANTS
FROM DEPORTATION.
MANY COULD RECEIVE WORK PERMITS.
THAT DREW FRESH WARNINGS FROM
THE TOP SENATE REPUBLICAN.
>> THE PRESIDENT HAS BEEN TOLD
OVER AND OVER AGAIN AND WE'RE
TELLING AGAIN TODAY: DON'T DO
THIS BECAUSE HIS EXECUTIVE
ACTIONS ARE NOT PERMANENT
CHANGES.
>> Ifill: THE TOP SENATE
DEMOCRAT, HARRY REID, SAID HE
URGED THE PRESIDENT NOT TO ACT
ON IMMIGRATION BEFORE CONGRESS
APPROVES SPENDING BILLS TO KEEP
THE GOVERNMENT RUNNING.
>> Ifill: CONGRESS ALSO MOVED
CLOSER TO A CRUCIAL VOTE ON THE
CONTROVERSIAL KEYSTONE X.L.
OIL PIPLINE.
HOUSE DEBATE BEGAN TODAY, WITH A
FINAL VOTE EXPECTED TOMORROW.
THE LEGISLATION WOULD APPROVE
CONSTRUCTION OF THE MASSIVE
PIPELINE, 875-MILES OF WHICH
WOULD BE IN THE U. PR.SOPONENTS
OF THE BILL SAY IT WILL CREATE
JOBS, BUT OPPONENTS SAY
>> Ifill: THE BALANCE OF POWER
IN THE NEW CONGRESS WILL CHANGE,
BUT THE PEOPLE AT THE VERY TOP,
WON'T.
SENATE REPUBLICANS TODAY RE-
ELECTED MITCH McCONNELL AS THEIR
NEW MAJORITY LEADER.
AND DEMOCRATS CHOSE HARRY REID
TO CONTINUE, THIS TIME AS
MINORITY LEADER.
IN THE HOUSE, SPEAKER JOHN
BOEHNER RETAINED HIS POSITION.
NEXT WEEK, DEMOCRAT NANCY PELOSI
IS EXPECTED TO BE RETURNED TO
HER POST AS MINORITY LEADER.
>> Woodruff: THE PRESIDENT OF
LIBERIA LIFTED A STATE OF
EMERGENCY TODAY, CITING PROGRESS
AGAINST EBOLA.
THE MEASURE WAS IMPOSED EARLIER
THIS MONTH.
IT BANNED LARGE GATHERINGS,
CLOSED SCHOOLS AND MARKETS AND
RESTRICTED CITIZENS' MOVEMENT.
THE EBOLA OUTBREAK HAS KILLED
5,100 PEOPLE IN WEST AFRICA MORE
THAN HALF OF THEM IN LIBERIA.
>> Ifill: PRESIDENT OBAMA URGED
MYANMAR'S GOVERNMENT TODAY NOT
TO BACKSLIDE ON REFORMS, AFTER
DECADES OF MILITARY RULE.
HE'S IN THE FORMER BURMA, FOR A
PAIR OF REGIONAL SUMMITS
WHILE THERE, HE PRESSED
PRESIDENT THEIN SEIN TO IMPROVE
TREATMENT OF MINORITY MUSLIMS,
AND LIFT OBSTACLES TO FULLY FREE
ELECTIONS BUT HE ALSO OFFERED
SUPPORT.
>> WE RECOGNIZE THAT CHANGE IS
HARD AND IT DOESN'T ALWAYS MOVE
IN A STRAIGHT LINE.
BUT I AM OPTIMISTIC ABOUT THE
POSSIBILITIES OF MYANMAR.
ALL THOSE WHO ARE SINCERE IN
PURSUING REFORM WILL ALWAYS HAVE
A STRONG ALLY IN THE UNITED
STATES OF AMERICA AND WE LOOK
FORWARD TO WORKING TOGETHER.
>> Ifill: MR. OBAMA HOLDS TALKS
TOMORROW WITH OPPOSITION LEADER
AUNG SAN SUU KYI.
UNDER MYANMAR'S CURRENT
CONSTITUTION, SHE IS BARRED FROM
RUNNING FOR PRESIDENT NEXT YEAR.
>> Woodruff: TWELVE NATIONALISTS
WERE RELEASED TODAY AFTER BEING
DETAINED FOR AN ATTACK ON THREE
U.S. SAILORS IN ISTANBUL.
FOOTAGE POSTED TO THE TURKISH
YOUTH UNION'S WEBSITE SHOWED THE
ASSAULT YESTERDAY.
MEMBERS OF THE GROUP CALLED THE
SAILORS "MURDERERS," THREW PAINT
AT THEM, AND TRIED TO PUT HOODS
OVER THEIR HEADS.
THE SUSPECTS MAY YET FACE
CRIMINAL CHARGES.
>> Ifill: A DOCTOR IN INDIA WAS
UNDER ARREST TODAY, IN THE
DEATHS OF 13 WOMEN HE
STERILIZED.
DOCTOR R.K. GUPTA ACKNOWLEDGED
CONDUCTING 83 PROCEDURES IN SIX
HOURS ON SATURDAY.
BUT HE INSISTED HE DID NOTHING
WRONG, AND SUGGESTED THE WOMEN
WERE GIVEN TAINTED MEDICATION.
THE STERILIZATIONS WERE PART OF
A GOVERNMENT EFFORT TO REDUCE
INDIA'S BIRTH RATE.
>> Woodruff: BACK IN THIS
COUNTRY, HUNDREDS OF FEDERAL
CONTRACT WORKERS WALKED OFF THE
JOB IN WASHINGTON, FOR ONE DAY.
HE IS CHARGED WITH CONSPIRING TO
VIOLATE SAFETY AND HEALTH
STANDARDS AND TO IMPEDE SAFETY
OFFICIALS.
>> Ifill: AN INTERNAL REVIEW
BLAMES A MAJOR WHITE HOUSE
SECURITY BREACH ON A SERIES OF
FAILURES.
A MAN JUMPED THE FENCE SEPTEMBER
19 AND MADE IT DEEP INSIDE THE
EXECUTIVE MANSION.
A "NEW YORK TIMES" REPORT SAYS
THE REVIEW FOUND SECRET SERVICE
ALARMS AND RADIOS FAILED TO WORK
PROPERLY AND AN OFFICER WITH AN
ATTACK DOG FAILED TO REACT
BECAUSE HE WAS IN HIS VAN
TALKING ON HIS CELL PHONE.
>> Woodruff: BACK IN THIS
COUNTRY, HUNDREDS OF FEDERAL
CONTRACT WORKERS WALKED OFF THE
JOB IN WASHINGTON, FOR ONE DAY.
U.S. CAPITOL EMPLOYEES RALLIED
FORBETTER BENEFITS AND A $15
FEDERAL MINIMUM WAGE.
EMPLOYEES FROM THE SMITHSONIAN
MUSEUMS AND THE PENTAGON JOINED
IN.
>> Woodruff: WALL STREET MANAGED
SMALL GAINS TODAY, ON POSITIVE
NEWS ABOUT CORPORATE EARNINGS.
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
WAS UP 40 POINTS TO CLOSE AT
17,652; THE NASDAQ ROSE FIVE
POINTS TO CLOSE AT 4,680; AND
THE S&P 500 ADDED A POINT, TO
FINISH AT 2,039.
ON THE OIL MARKET, THE PRICE OF
CRUDE FELL BELOW $75 A BARREL A
NEW, FOUR-YEAR LOW.
>> Woodruff: STILL TO COME ON
THE NEWSHOUR.
SHOULD THE U.S. CHANGE ITS
STRATEGY TO COMBAT THE ISLAMIC
STATE?
COMPLICATIONS FOR THE SPACE
PROBE THAT LANDED ON A COMET.
NEWLY ELECTED CONGRESS MEMBERS
MOVE INTO THEIR OFFICES ON
CAPITOL HILL.
AMAZON COMPROMISES IN AN E-BOOK
PRICING DISPUTE.
ALASKA'S PUSH TO RETAIN MORE
TEACHERS.
THE HAZARDS OF EARNING A LIVING
ON THE SLOPES OF MOUNT EVEREST.
AND, TWO UNLIKELY HEROES TEAM UP
TO MAKE A ZOMBIE MOVIE.
>> Ifill: NOW TO THE ISLAMIC
STATE GROUP, EARLIER TODAY A
DEFIANT MESSAGE FROM ITS LEADER
WAS DISTRIBUTED, AS LAWMAKERS
HERE IN WASHINGTON TOOK AIM AT
THE PRESIDENT'S STRATEGY TO TAKE
DOWN THE GROUP.
CHIEF FOREIGN AFFAIRS
CORRESPONDENT MARGARET WARNER
REPORTS.
>> Warner: IT'S THE FIRST TIME
THE ISLAMIC STATE LEADER HAS
BEEN HEARD FROM SINCE IRAQI
OFFICIALS CLAIMED HE'D BEEN
WOUNDED OR EVEN KILLED IN AIR
STRIKES A WEEK AGO.
THE 17 MINUTE RECORDING EXHORTS
HIS FIGHT TO THE END AND ALL BUT
TAUNTS THE U.S. COALITION.
>> ( translated ): AND SOON THE
JEWS AND CRUSADERS WILL BE
FORCED TO COME DOWN TO THE
GROUND AND SEND THEIR GROUND
FORCES TO THEIR DEATHS AND
DESTRUCTION.
HERE IS OBAMA WHO HAS ORDERED
THE DEPLOYMENT OF 1,500
ADDITIONAL SOLDIERS UNDER THE
CLAIM THAT THEY ARE ADVISORS
BECAUSE THE CRUSADERS'
AIRSTRIKES HAVE NOT PREVENTED
THE ISLAMIC STATE'S ADVANCE, NOR
WEAKENED ITS RESOLVE.
>> Waer: rnIT'S UNCLEAR WHEN THE
RECORDING WAS MADE, BUT IT
APPEARED AS PENTAGON LEADERS
TOLD A HOUSE HEARING THERE'S
BEEN STEADY AND SUSTAINABLE
PROGRESS AGAINST THE ISLAMIC
STATE, ALSO KNOWN AS ISIL.
DEFENSE SECRETARY CHUCK HAGEL.
>> THIS PRESSURE IS HAVING AN
EFFECT ON POTENTIAL ISIL
RECRUITS AND COLLABORATORS,
STRIKING A BLOW TO MORALE AND
RECRUITMENT.
WE KNOW THAT.
OUR INTELLIGENCE IS VERY CLEAR
ON THAT.
AND AS IRAQI FORCES BUILD
STRENGTH, THE TEMPO AND
INTENSITY OF OUR COALITION'S AIR
CAMPAIGN WILL ACCELERATE IN
TANDEM.
>> Warner: CALIFORNIA DEMOCRAT
LORETTA SANCHEZ COMPLAINED
THAT'S THE VITAL FLAW IN THE
PLAN.
SHE ARGUED TO GENERAL MARTIN
DEMPSEY, CHAIR OF THE JOINT
CHIEFS, THAT PAST ATTEMPTS TO
TRAIN IRAQI FORCES WERE
FAILURES.
>> WHAT ARE YOU DOING TO CHANGE
THAT SO THAT THESE MEN ACTUALLY
DO TAKE THE FIGHT TO ISIL AND
OUR MEN AND WOMEN DON'T HAVE
BOOTS ON THE GROUND?
>> ONE OF THE IMPORTANT
ASSUMPTIONS ABOUT THIS CAMPAIGN
IS THAT THE IRAQI GOVERNMENT
DOES ESTABLISH ITS INTENT TO
CREATE A GOVERNMENT OF NATIONAL
UNITY.
I CAN PREDICT FOR YOU RIGHT NOW,
IF THAT DOESN'T HAPPEN, THEN THE
IRAQI SECURITY FORCES WILL NOT
HOLD TOGETHER.
>> Warner: DEMPSEY LEFT OPEN THE
POSSIBILITY THAT IN SPECIAL
CIRCUMSTANCES AMERICAN TROOPS
MIGHT YET BE CALLED UPON TO DO
MORE THAN TRAIN AND ADVISE THE
IRAQIS.
>> THERE ARE SOME PLACES ALONG
THE PATH THAT I THINK WILL BE
FAIRLY COMPLEX TERRAIN FOR THEM,
INCLUDING, FOR EXAMPLE, MOSUL
AND EVENTUALLY AS THEY NEED TO
RESTORE THE BORDER BETWEEN IRAQ
AND SYRIA.
I'M NOT PREDICTING AT THIS POINT
THAT I WOULD RECOMMEND THAT
THOSE FORCES IN MOSUL AND ALONG
THE BORDER WOULD NEED TO BE
ACCOMPANIED BY U.S. FORCES BUT
WE'RE CERTAINLY CONSIDERING IT.
>> Warner: THE HEARING ALSO
FOCUSED ON THE DISPUTE OVER
U.S. STRATEGY IN SYRIA.
TURKEY AND OTHERS IN THE REGION
HAVE CRITICIZED TRAINING
MODERATE SYRIAN REBELS TO FIGHT
ISLAMIC STATE FORCES BUT NOT TO
TAKE ON PRESIDENT BASHAR AL-
ASSAD.
THEY SAY THAT POLICY IS NOT
REALISTIC, AND SOME REPUBLICAN
CRITICS IN CONGRESS HAVE AGREED.
BUT SECRETARY HAGEL WARNED TODAY
THAT REMOVING ASSAD FROM POWER
WOULD DO NOTHING TO ROLL BACK
ISLAMIC STATE GAINS.
>> WHEN YOU LOOK AT WHAT ISIL
DOMINATES NOW, THE SWATH OF THE
CONTROL THEY HAVE, EASTERN
SYRIA, MUCH OF NORTH AND WESTERN
IRAQ, YOU COULD CHANGE ASSAD
TODAY AND THAT'S NOT GOING TO
CHANGE ALL THE DYNAMICS QUICKLY,
CERTAINLY IN SYRIA.
>> Warner: SYRIAN REBEL LEADERS
REPORTED THE ISLAMIC STATE AND
AL-QAIDA'S BRANCH IN SYRIA, THE
AL-NUSRA FRONT, HAVE AGREED TO
STOP FIGHTING EACH OTHER, AND
WORK TOGETHER.
>> Ifill: NOW, FOR A CLOSER LOOK
AT THE ADMINISTRATION'S STRATEGY
TO DEFEAT THE I.S. GROUP INSIDE
SYRIA, WE TURN TO FORMER U.S.
AMBASSADOR TO IRAQ JAMES
JEFFREY.
HE'S NOW A DISTINGUISHED FELLOW
AT THE WASHINGTON INSTITUTE FOR
NEAR EAST POLICY.
AND PHYLLIS BENNIS, DIRECTOR OF
THE NEW INTERNATIONALISM PROJECT
AT THE INSTITUTE FOR POLICY
STUDIES.
AMBASSADOR JEFFREY, IS OUR
STRATEGY, SUCH AS WE UNDERSTAND
IT TO BE, THE SAME FOR DEEFFECT
THE ISLAMIC STATE AS AS OUR
STRATEGY IN SYRIA?
>> NO, IT'S QUITE DIFFERENT.
AS BOTH SECRETARY HAGEL AND
GENERAL DEMPSEY SAID WE HAVE AN
IRAQ-FIRST STRATEGY BUT
IMPORTANTLY DEMPSEY UNDERLINED
IT IS NOT AN IRAQ-ONLY STRATEGY.
WE HAVE PUT CONSIDERABLE
RESOURCES INTO STOPPING ISIS IN
THE SYRIAN KURDISH TOWN OF
KOBANI.
NONETHELESS, DEAL WITH ASSAD IS
VERY, VERY DIFFICULT BECAUSE
HE'S ENTRENCHED IN POWER.
HE'S ONE OF THE GENERATORS OF
THIS ENTIRE CONFLICT AND THE
GROWTH OF ISIS.
YES, WE DON'T HAVE ANY CAPABLE
ALLIES AS WE DO, TO SOME DEGREE
AT LEAST, IN IRAQ.
THUS, WE'RE STARTING IN IRAQ
TRYING TO PUSH AGAINST ISIS, AND
THERE'S BEEN SEVERAL OFFENSES TO
THE NORTH OF BAGHDAD AND SOTHE
SOUTH AS WELL, THAT HAVE BEEN
PRETTY SUCCESSFUL.
SO I THINK THAT THIS IS A SMART
APPROACH TO FIRST START IN IRAQ,
AND THEN WE'LL SEE HOW THE
SITUATION DEVELOPS IN SYRIA
WHERE WE HAVE MULTIPLE ENEMIES.
>> Ifill: PHYLLIS BENNIS, IS
OUR STRATEGY CORRECT IN THAT
RESPECT?
>> NO, I DON'T THINK IT'S
CORRECT.
IT'S CORRECT TO NOT BE TRYING
AGAIN TO CARRY OUT REGIME CHANGE
IN A COUNTRY WHERE WE ARE NOT
APPRECIATED, WHERE WE ARE NOT
BEING ASKED FOR REGIME CHANGE BY
EVERYBODY.
THERE ARE SOME, CLEARLY, WHO ARE
ASKING FOR DIRECT U.S. MILITARY
ENGAGEMENT, BUT IF WE LOOK AT
OUR HISTORY OF REGIME CHANGE IN
THAT REGION, IT'S NOT A MODEL
THAT I THINK ANYBODY'S GOING TO
WANT.
DO PEOPLE WANT TO END UP LIKE
THE SITUATION NOW IN LIBYA OR IN
IRAQ?
WHERE YOU END UP AFTER REGIME
CHANGE WITH MORE VIOLENCE, MORE
CHAOS, MORE EXTREMISM, NOT LESS.
SO THAT PART I THINK IS TRUE, IS
CORRECT.
I JUST DON'T THINK THAT WE
SHOULD BE SAYING THAT THAT'S THE
NEXT STAGE.
I DON'T THINK THE MILITARY
APPROACH HERE IS GOING TO WORK
AT ALL IN EITHER IRAQ OR SYRIA.
>> Ifill: WELL LET ME ASK
AMBASSADOR JEFFREY ABOUT THAT.
IS THERE A BAD TRACK RECORD FOR
THE U.S. IN ENGAGEMENT IN THE
KIND OF COUNTRIES THAT PHYLLIS
BENNIS MENTIONS?
AND SHOULD WE BE THINKING OF A
DITCH APPROACH?
IS THAT WHAT THE WHITE HOUSE IS
DOING NOW?
>> ABSOLUTE, SHE'S ABSOLUTELY
RIGHT, AND I'VE BEEN INVOLVED IN
SOME OF THOSE BAD APPROACHES.
BUT THAT DOESN'T MEAN YOU SIMPLY
SIT BACK AND WALK THIS THING.
SECRETARY HAGEL SAID TODAY THERE
IS NO PURELY MILITARY APPROACH.
I WOULD ADD A COROLLARY TO
THAT-- THERE IS NO POLITICAL
APPROACH AT THIS POINT WITH A
FOE LIKE ISIS THAT DOESN'T HAVE
A MILITARY OPPONENT.
>> Ifill: AND A FOE LIKE
ASSAD?
>> AND A FOE LIKE ASSAD YOU ALSO
NEED A MILITARY COMPONENT BUT
SOMEWHAT DIFFERENTLY.
THE PRESIDENT'S MISSION IS TO
DESTROY ISIS.
HE HASN'T GIVEN THE SAME MISSION
TO DESTROY ASSAD.
WE NEED TO PROVIDE CREDIBLE
SUPPORT TOON OPPOSITION WHICH IS
NOT SOME PEOPLE IN SYRIA.
IT'S BASICALLY THE ENTIRE SUNNI
POPULATION WITH A FEW
EXCEPTIONS, TO STOP ASSAD FROM
WINNING THIS THING.
IF YOU CAN GENERATE A STALEMATE,
THEN WE CAN GET BACK TO GENEVA
WHERE WE FAILED TWICE AND GET
SOME KIND OF POLITICAL
RESOLUTION.
I THINK THAT'S GOAL HE'S LOOKING
FOR.
>> Ifill: PHYLLIS BENNIS, YOU
CAN RESPOND TO THAT AND I HAVE
ANOTHER QUESTION FOR YOU.
>> SURE.
I THINK THE QUESTION OF
NEGOTIATIONS IS CRUCIAL.
THERE WAS A FAILURE TWICE IN A
ROW IN GENEVA, BUT THE FAILURE
HAD EVERYTHING TO DO WITH THE
RESTRICTIONS THAT WERE PUT ON
THE NATURE OF THESE TALKS.
WHEN WE HAVE TALKS THAT START
WITH "IRAN CAN'T BE AT THE
TABLE," WE'RE GUARANTEEING
FAILURE BECAUSE IRAN IS A MAJOR
PLAYER, WHETHER WE LIKE THEM OR
NOT.
WHEN WE START WITH A
COUNTRYITARY THAT SAYS EVERYONE
AT THE TABLE HAS TO START BY
ACKNOWLEDGING THAT ASSAD MUST
GO, THAT SAYS THAT RUSSIA AND
IRAN ARE NOT GOING TO BE THERE,
LET ALONE THE REGIME ITSELF.
SO WHATEVER IS AGREED TO IS ONLY
GOING TO BE AGREED TO BY ONE
SIDE.
>> Ifill: EXCEPT ALLIES LIKE
TURKEY, SOMETIMES ALLIES LIKE
TURKEY, ASKING FOR NO-FLY ZONES,
SEEM TO BE QUITE UNHAPPY WITH
OUR CURRENT POLICY.
>> THEY ARE.
IN FACT THE RUSSIANS DID SHOW UP
IN GENEVA, BUT THE QUESTION
WHETHER IRAN SHOULD SHOW UP OR
NOT IS A VERY TOUGH ONE BECAUSE
OF EXACTLY WHAT YOU SAID-- THAT
IS, THE SUNNI ARAB STATES IN THE
REGION AND TURKEY SEE IRAN AS
MUCH OF A THREAT AS THEY DO
ISIS.
SO, THEREFORE, AGAIN, WE HAVE
MULTIPLE ENEMIES IN THE SYRIAN
FRONT.
>> THIS IS NOT AN ENEMY.
IF WE'RE SERIOUS ABOUT
DIPLOMACY-- AND I THINK WE HAVE
TO BE-- NUMBER ONE, EVERY BOMB
THAT WE DROP DRIVES SOME PEOPLE
INTO THE ARMS OF ISIS.
WHEN WE LOOK AT IRAQ, IF WE'RE
TALKING ABOUT THE AMBASSADOR--
THE AMBASSADOR MENTIONED THE
NEED FOR AN INCLUSIVE
GOVERNMENT, THE NEW PRIME
MINISTER IS SAYING SOME OFHE T
RIGHT THINGS, BUT WHO DOES HE
APPOINT AS THE MINISTER OF
INTERIOR?
THE HEAD ONE MOST SECTARIAN
SHI'A MILITIAS IN RECENT IRAQI
HISTORY.
THAT WAS NOT A GOOD MESSAGE TO
THE SUNNIS OF IRAQ.
SO THAT'S ONE PART OF IT.
THE THE OTHER PART OF IT IS
WE'RE LOOKING AT A SCENARIO
WHERE WE HAVE TO BE SERIOUS
ABOUT DIPLOMACY, NOT AS A SUBSET
OF THE MILITARY BUT INSTEAD OF
THE MILITARY.
IF WE REALLY WANT TO SOLVE THE
PROBLEM, WE CAN'T BOMB
EXTREMISM.
WE DOM BOMBCITIES.
WE BOMB PEOPLE.
WE KILL PEOPLE.
WE DON'T BOMB SCREAM EXROOEMISM.
SOMETIMES WE HIT EXTREMISTS,
SOMETIMES WE DON'T.
>> Ifill: THIS SEEMS TO BE A
UNIQUE SET OF CIRCUMSTANCES.
WE'RE NOT TALKING ABOUT ONE
COUNTRY WHERE WE'RE TALKING
ABOUT A REGIME CHANGE.
WE'RE TALKING ABOUT A REGION AND
ALLIES WHO ARE NOT NECESSARILY
ON THE BOARD IN THE WAY THEY
HAVE BEEN IN PAST INCURSIONS.
I WONDER IF YOU HAD TO GIVE THE
ADMINISTRATION ADVICE ABOUT THE
ONE THING THEY SHOULD BE
RECONSIDERING AT THIS STAGE,
WHAT WOULD IT BE?
>> IT WOULD BE MOVE A BIT FASTER
ON PUTTING ADVISORY TEAMS OUT
WITH THESE IRAQI UNIT.
I THINK THEY'RE GOING TO NEED
THEM, FROM MY EXPERIENCE THERE.
AGAIN, THE ADMINISTRATION IS NOT
JUST LOOKING TO THE MILITARY,
AS, AGAIN, HAGEL AND DEMPSEY
POINT OUT TODAY.
THEY HAVE A BROAD PROGRAM, AND
THEY UNDERSTAND YOU CAN'T DEFEAT
EXTREMISM WITH BOMBS.
BUT YOU CAN DEFEAT PEOPLE IN GUN
TRUCKS AND IN TANKS AND
ARTILLERY WITH BOMBS.
>> Ifill: BRIEFLY.
>> BUT I THINK THAT WE CAN'T
EXPECT THAT THIS IS GOING TO
WORK.
IF WE ARE SERIOUS, WE HAVE TO DO
DIPLOMACY THAT IS NOT BOUND UP
WITH THE MILITARY.
WE HEARD ABOUT $5.6 BILLION MORE
TO PAY FOR THE MILITARY.
WE DIDN'T HEAR ABOUT ANY
ADDITIONAL FUNDING TO PAY FOR
MORE DIPLOMACY.
THAT'S WHAT WE NEED.
>> Ifill: PHYLLIS BENNIS OF
THE INSTITUTE FOR POLICY STUDIES
AND AMBASSADOR JAMES JEFFREY FOR
THE INSTITUTE FOR NEAR EAST
STUDY, THANK YOU BOTH VERY MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Woodruff: THERE'S A LOT OF
TALK ONCE AGAIN TODAY ABOUT THE
ROSETTA SPACECRAFT AND ITS
PHILAE LANDER THAT DESCENDED
ONTO A COMET YESTERDAY.
IT TURNS OUT IT WAS A BUMPIER
RIDE THAN INITIALLY THOUGHT AND
NOW THERE ARE QUESTIONS ABOUT
WHAT IT MAY MEAN FOR THE
LANDER'S MISSION.
WE BEGIN WITH THIS REPORT BY
ALOK JHA OF INDEPENDENT
TELEVISION NEWS.
>> Reporter: UNSECURED,
POSITIONED PRECARIOUSLY, BUT
COMMUNICATING-- THE PHILAE
LANDER SENT PICTURES TODAY OF
ITS NEW HOME ON A COMET 500
MILLION KILOMETERS FROM EARTH.
ONE OF ITS FEATURES IN THE
CORNER HERE, IN SHADOW, PHILAE
IS SURROUNDED BY WHAT LOOKED
LIKE SHISHEER WORKY CLIFFS.
THIS WAS TAKEN LESS THAN A
MINUTE BEFORE IT TOUCHED DOWN.
HERE WE SEE THE LANDER DWARFED
BY THE COMET.
PHILAE ENDED BUP A KILOMETER
FROM ITS INTENDED TARGET.
THE CROSS IS WHERE IT WAS MEANT
TO LAND.
THE BOX IS WHERE IT IS NOW.
>> IT'S JUST SOMETHING EMOTIONAL
WITHIN THE CONTEXT OF HAVING
SOME MANMADE FEATURE IN THE
FOREGROUND OF SOME ALIEN
LANDSCAPE.
AND THAT REALLY GETS YOU.
THAT'S WHAT IS GETTING PEOPLE
NOW.
THIS IS WHERE THE EMOTION IS.
THIS IS A MASSIVE TECHNOLOGICAL
FEAT.
>> Reporter: PHILAE LANDED
JUST BEFORE 4:00 P.M. YESTERDAY
BUT THE EQUIPMENT DESIGNED TO
ANSWER IT FAILED CAUSING THE
LANDER TO BOUNCE BACK UP OFF THE
SURFACE OF THE COMET BY A
KILOMETER.
THEN, AFTER ABOUT TWO HOURS,  IT
CAME BACK DOWN ON TO THE COMET
AGAIN.
BUT ONCE AGAIN TPOUNCEED OFF,
EVENTUALLY SETTLING BACK ON TO
THE SURFACE FIVE MINUTES LATER.
SCIENTISTS NOW KNOW THAT PHILAE
IS LYING ON ITS SIDE, TWO OF ITS
FEET ON THE GROUND, ONE POINTING
INTO SPACE.
>> WE DON'T KNOW VERY WELL WHERE
IT IS ON THE SURFACE OF THE
COMET BUT WE HAVE NO DOUBT IT IS
ON THE SURFACE.
IT IS WORKING MARVELOUSLY,
TRANSMITTING DATA CONTINUOUSLY.
WE DON'T LOSE DATA.
IT'S DOING ALL THE OPERATIONS WE
COMMAND IT TO DO, SO IT'S
PERFECTLY WORKING.
( APPLAUSE )
>> Reporter: THE MAN WHO
CODISCOVERED THE COMET 45 YEARS
AGO CAME ALONG TO CONGRATULATE
THE MISSION SCIENTISTS.
>> IT IS A GREAT, GREAT WIN AND
WE'RE HAPPY.
HAPPY.
>> Reporter: PHILAE'S ARRIVAL
AT THE COMET HAS BEEN A
HAIR-RAISING IMPERFECT
ADVENTURE, BUT IT'S IN ONE
EXPEES CAN NOW START ITS
SCIENTIFIC WORK.
>> Woodruff: LET'S TALK A
LITTLE BIT MORE NOW ABOUT THE
SCIENTIFIC WORK AND THE
>> Woodruff: LET'S TALK A BIT
MORE NOW ABOUT THAT SCIENTIFIC
WORK AND THE COMPLICATIONS AHEAD
GIVEN THE POSITION OF THE
LANDER.
NEWSHOUR SCIENCE CORRESPONDENT
MILES O'BRIEN JOINS US AGAIN
TONIGHT FROM MOUNTAIN VIEW,
CALIFORNIA.
SO, MILES, WHAT IS IT THAT THE
LANDER THAT THIS ROSETTA LANDER
IS SUPPOSED TO BE DOING WHILE
IT'S ON THE COMET?
>> WELL, PHILAE IS ACTUALLY
LOADED WITH SCIENCE, 10
EXPERIMENTS IN ALL, AND IT CAN
DO A CHUNK OF THE EXPERIMENTS.
THOSE THAT WORK IS ALREADY UNDER
WAY.
AS A MATTER OF FACT, ONE OF THE
ITEMS ON IT IS TO DETERMINE THE
MAGNETIC FIELD OF THE COMET, AND
THAT DEVICE, THAT SCIENTIFIC
INSTRUMENT, WAS ABLE TO
DETERMINE THAT AS IT WAS IN THE
MIDST OF ITS BOUNCING-- ONCE,
TWICE, AND FINALLY LANDING-- IT
DID A PIROUETTE AT ONE POINT.
THAT'S KIND OF INTERESTING RIGHT
ON ITS OWN RIGHT.
IT'S ABLE TO SEND RADIO WAVES
THROUGH THE COMET WHICH WOULD BE
RECEIVED ON THE OTHER SIDE BY
THE ORBITING ROSETTA AND BE ABLE
TO DETECT SOME KEY FEATURES OF
THE SURFAR, THE CONSTITUENCY AND
MAKEUP OF THE SURFACE OF THE
COMET.
THE BIG ONE, THOUGH, THE DRILL,
THAT'S AN OPEN QUESTION RIGHT
NOW, BECAUSE THEY DON'T-- THEY
ASSUME, I SHOULD SAY, THAT WHEN
YOU DRILL IN TO THE SURFACE
WITHOUT BEING ANCHORED, THERE
COULD BE TROUBLE.
>> Woodruff: REMIND US, MILES,
WHY THEY WANT TO GET INSIDE THIS
COMET.
WHAT IS IT ABOUT THE COMET THAT
IS IMPORTANT FOR ALL OF US TO
UNDERSTAND?
>> WELL, IT'S BASICALLY-- IF YOU
THINK ABOUT YOU AND I HAVING A
CONVERSATION, WE PROBABLY OWE IT
ALL TO COMETS.
COAMENTS ARE WHAT SCIENTISTS
BELIEVE SEEDED OUR SOLAR SYSTEM
WITH LIFE, WITH WATER, WITH SOME
OF THE KEY INGREDIENTS OF LIFE--
ORGANIC COMPOUNDS, AMINO ACIDS.
IT'S NOW BELIEVED WIDELY THAT
THESE COMETS WERE GOING AROUND,
HITTING IMPACTS IN THE EARLY
DAYS OF THE SOLAR SYSTEM,
CREATING THE OCEANS THAT WE
HAVE, AND, THUS, CREATING THE
CUSHY BIRTH FOR LIFE THAT WE
HAVE.
SO IF YOU WANT TO FIND OUT A
LITTLE BIT OF HOW LIFE BEGAN,
WHETHER WE'RE ALONE IN THE
UNIVERSE, AND REALLY WHAT WAS
GOING ON 4.5 BILLION YEARS AGO
WHEN THE SOLAR SYSTEM WAS BEING
FORMED, A COMET IS A PERFECT
PLACE TO GO.
>> Woodruff: HOW BIG A
DISAPPOINTMENT IS IT, THEN, TO
GO ALL THE WAY OUT THERE, 300
MILLION MILES, AND NOT TO BE
ABLE TOET G THAT?
>> WELL, YOU KNOW, YOU WANT TO
GET IT ALL, BUT, BOY, IT'S
PRETTY DARN COOL WHAT THEY'VE
ACCOMPLISHED, ISN'T IT?
THEY'RE ON A COMET.
THEY'VE LANDED IN A VERY
DIFFICULT LANDING ENVIRONMENT,
1/1000 THE GRAVITY HE WITHV ON
EARTH.
WHEN THE HARPOONS DIDN'T DEPLOY,
THAT WAS A PROBLEM.
THIS IS A CRAFT THAT SPENT 10
YEARS FLYING THROUGH SPACE AND
NOEVERYTHING WORKED.
YOU CAN FOCUS ON, THAT OR YOU
CAN TAKE A LOOK AT THOSE
PICTURES AND GO, WOW.
THIS IS AMAZING WE'RE HERE.
WHATEVER SCIENCE WE'RE ABLE TO
GET SAY BONUS.
AND I SUSPECT THAT SCIENTISTS
TOWARD THE END OF THE 60-HOUR
BATTERY LIFE MIGHT VERY WELL TRY
TO DRILL IN AND SEE WHAT
HAPPENS.
WHAT DO THEY HAVE TO LOSE?
>> Woodruff: AND YOU MENTION
THE BATTERY, WHICH IS ONLY,
WHAT, A FEW DAYS-- IT'S SUPPOSED
TO LAST ONLY A FEW DAYS.
IS THAT RIGHT?
>> YES, IT DOES HAVE SOLAR
PANELS AND A RECHARGEABLE
CAPABILITY, AND THEY WERE HOPING
TO EXTEND THE MISSION FOR QUITE
SOMETIME, BUT THAT'S UNCLEAR
RIGHT NOW BECAUSE IT'S
APPARENTLY AT AN ODD ANGLE IN
ITS LANDING POSITION, AND IT'S
ALSO SHIELDED FROM THE SUN BY,
APPARENTLY, A CLIFF.
SO IT ONLY GETS ABOUT 90 MINUTES
OF SUNLIGHT PER DAY, AND SO
THAT'S GOING TO LIMIT THE
ABILITY OF THOSE SOLAR ARRAYS TO
RECHARGE AND PROVIDE AN EXTENDED
MISSION.
SO THEY'RE PRETTY FRANTIC RIGHT
NOW TRYING TO GET AS MUCH
SCIENCE AS THEY CAN.
>> Woodruff: BUT AS YOU SAY,
EXCITING, BECAUSE IT WOULD BE
THE FIRST TIME TO LAND ON A
COMET, FIRST TIME TO GO AROUND
THE SUN, I GATHER.
>> YEAH, YOU KNOW, TO HAVE
SPACECRAFT IN FORMATION, FULL,
WITH A COMET, AS IT HEADS
TOWARDS THE SUN, AS COMETS GETS
GETCLOSER TO THE SUN AND THE
TEMPERATURE HEAT UP, THINGS GET
REALLY EXCITING.
THERE'S A LOT OF GAS THAT COMES
OFF OF IT, AND IT SPIEWZ.
A COMET'S TAIL, AFTER ALL, IS
THE ICE SUBLIMATING INTO SPACE
AS THE COMET GETS CLOSER TO THE
SUN.
AND SO, IT'S GOING TO BE ACTION
PACKED AS IT GETS CLOSER TO THE
SUN.
LET'S HOPE THESE INSTRUMENTS ARE
ABLE TO SURVIVE AND PHONE HOME.
>> Woodruff: AND THERE'S EVEN
SOME SOUND ASSOCIATED WITH ALL
THIS.
WE'LL URGE EVERYBODY TO GO
ONLINE TO LOOK FOR THAT.
MILES O'BRIEN, WE THANK YOU.
>> YOU'RE WELCOME, JIED.
>> Ifill: CONGRESS RETURNED TO
WASHINGTON YESTERDAY ALONG WITH
A FEW DOZEN NEWLY ELECTED
MEMBERS.
THE NEWSHOUR'S DOMENICO
MONTANARO SPOKE WITH SOME OF THE
NEWCOMERS AS THEY LEARNED HOW TO
NAVIGATE LIFE ON CAPITOL HILL.
>> Reporter: WHILE THE NEW
CONGRESS DOESN'T START UNTIL
JANUARY, ITS NEWEST MEMBERS ARE
IN TOWN THIS WEEK FOR
ORIENTATION, A KIND OF LAWMAKER
BOOT CAMP.
IT'S A TIME OF TRANSITION ON
CAPITOL HILL.
ONE IN EIGHT CONGRESSIONAL
OFFICES  GETISTING A NEW BOSS
WITH A TOTAL OF SEVENTY NEW
MEMBERS COMING IN.
MOST OF THEM ARE STAYING HERE IN
THE CAPITOL HILL HOTEL.
FOR MEMBERS OF BOTH PARTIES,
IT'S A HECTIC TIME.
>> IT'S BEEN A WHIRLWIND SO FAR
NEW MEMBER MIMI WALTERS ARRIVED
TUESDAY NIGHT AND ALREADY HAS A
LONG TO-DO LIST.
>> THERE'S SO MANY PEOPLE WE
HAVE TO MEET, SO MANY THINGS WE
HAVE TO GET DONE, HIRE STAFF,
FIND OFFICES, FIND A PLACE TO
LIVE AND GET ORIENTED WITH
WASHINGTON D.C.
>> HI!
HOW ARE YOU, SWEETIE?
>> Reporter: THE CALIFORNIA
REPUBLICAN WAS ELECTED FROM A
DISTRICT SOME 2,600 MILES AWAY.
WE CAUGHT UP WITH HER WHILE SHE
WAS TAKING A LOOK AT POTENTIAL
OFFICE SPACE.
>> MY GOSH THESE OFFICES ARE SO
SMALL.
>> Reporter: BUT EVEN SMALL
OFFICES CAN HAVE HIDDEN PERKS.
>> THIS IS COOL.
>> Reporter: SOME COME WITH
MAKESHIFT BALCONIES LIKE THIS
ONE, WITH ROOM ENOUGH FOR A
BARBECUE GRILL, AT LEAST A TINY
ONE.
>> I'M TIRED, BUT I'M VERY
EXCITED.
>> Reporter: ANOTHER INCOMING
CONGRESSMAN WHO TRAVELED A LONG
WAY TO WASHINGTON IS MIAMI
NATIVE CARLOS CURBELO.
HE'S ONE OF THE FIFTEEN
REPUBLICANS WHO BEAT OUT A
DEMOCRATIC INCUMBENT, HELPING
EXPAND THE REPUBLICAN MAJORITY
IN THE HOUSE.
HE GOT THROUGH A TOUGH CAMPAIGN,
BUT ON A 65-DEGREE DAY, HE'S
FACING ANOTHER CHALLENGE.
>> THIS IS COLD BY OUR
STANDARDS, THIS ISN'T COOL LIKE
I WAS TOLD ON THE PLANE.
IT'S COLD.
IT'S TOO WINDY.
WE'LL BE MAKING USE OF THE
TUNNELS DOWN HERE UNDER THE
CAPITOL.
>> Reporter: WHILE NEW MEMBERS
ARE TRYING TO FIGURE OUT OFFICE
SPACE AND THE WEATHER.
THOSE AT THE TOP LEVELS IN THE
CAPITOL ARE BUSY WITH SOMETHING
ELSE.
RESHAPING THE POLITICAL
LANDSCAPE.
>> THAT'S WHAT THIS WEEK IS ALL
ABOUT.
TRYING TO LISTEN TO THE CAUCUS,
TRY AND FIGURE OUT WHAT EXACTLY
THEY WANT TO DO DURING THE LAME
DUCK AND WHAT EXACTLY IS GOING
TO HAVE TO BE PUNTED UNTIL NEXT
YEAR.
>> Reporter: BEFORE RETIRING IN
2010, JIM MANLEY WORKED ON THE
HILL FOR TWO DECADES, INCLUDING
SIX YEARS FOR DEMOCRATIC
MAJORITY LEADER HARRY REID.
>> THERE'S A WHOLE BUNCH OF
PEOPLE THAT ARE GETTING READY TO
MOVE FROM THE MINORITY TO THE
MAJORITY WHO ARE ANXIOUS TO TRY
TO EXECUTE THE LEVERS OF POWER
TO THE EXTENT THEY CAN.
>> Reporter: AND RIGHT NOW,
THAT'S REPUBLICANS, FRESH OFF
THEIR BIG WINS ON ELECTION NIGHT
CHIEF AMONG THEM, TAKING CONTROL
OF THE SENATE.
KENTUCKY SENATOR MITCH
McCONNELL, THE MAN WHO WILL LEAD
THE NEW SENATE STARTING IN
JANUARY IS ALREADY RALLYING HIS
TROOPS.
>> LAST WEEK, THE AMERICAN
PEOPLE SENT A STRONG MESSAGE TO
WASHINGTON.
THEY VOTED FOR A NEW DIRECTION.
THEY CALLED FOR CHANGE IN WAY
THE WE DO THINGS HERE IN THE
SENATE.
AND THEY SENT A NEW TEAM TO
CARRY OUT THOSE WISHES FORWARD.
AND WE PLAN TO DO JUST THAT.
>> Reporter: FOR NEW MEMBERS,
THE LOWEST ON THE TOTEM POLE IN
A PLACE DOMINATED BY SENIORITY,
THEY, TOO, ARE READY TO GET TO
WORK.
BUT THEY WILL HAVE TO WAIT AT
LEAST A FEW MORE WEEKS BEFORE
THAT CAN HAPPEN.
DOMENICO MONTANARO, PBS NEWSHOUR
ON CAPITOL HILL
>> Ifill: YOU CAN FIND A
BREAKDOWN BY THE NUMBERS OF THE
INCOMING CONGRESSIONAL CLASS ON
OUR WEBSITE.
>> Woodruff: AFTER A BITTER
SEVEN MONTH STAND-OFF, THE
WORLD'S LARGEST ONLINE RETAILER
AND A BIG PLAYER IN THE
PUBLISHING INDUSTRY REACH AN
AGREEMENT.
JEFFREY BROWN HAS THE STORY.
>> Woodruff: IT WAS A FIGHT OVER
WHO SETS THE PRICE FOR E-BOOKS
AND HOW THE MONEY FROM THOSE
SALES SHOULD BE DIVIDED.
IT PIT TWO BIG PLAYERS AGAINST
ONE ANOTHER: ONLINE RETAILING
GIANT AMAZON VS. MAJOR
PUBLISHING HOUSE, HACHETTE AND
IT GOT PLENTY PUBLIC AND EVEN
NASTY.
HERE TO TELL US ABOUT TODAY'S
DEVELOPMENT IS JEFFRY
TRACHTENBERG OF THE "WALL STREET
JOURNAL."
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
REMIND US FIRST WHAT WAS THE
HEART OF THIS DISPUTE, AND
TODAY, HOW WAS IT RESOLVED?
>> SO WHAT HAPPENED WAS, AMAZON
AND THE BIG PUBLISHER HACHETTE
HAD A DISAGREEMENT OVER EBOOKS.
HOW WOULD THE EBOOK PIE BE SPLIT
AND HOW WOULD EBOOKS BE PRICED?
AND THIS DISAGREEMENT HAD
FUNDAMENTAL REPERCUSSIONS FOR
THE REST OF THE PUBLISHING
INDUSTR ANDY, IT DRAGGED ON AND
INTO ON.
IT STARTED IN MAY AND IT'S ONLY
BEEN RESOLVED NOW.
IT SEEMS LIKE BOTH SIDES
CONCEDED A LITTLE TO EACH OTHER,
BUT NEITHER SIDE HAS DECLARED
VICTORY.
>> Brown: IT LOOKS LIKE
HACHETTE WILL SET THE PRICES AND
AMAZON WILL GET A HIGHER
PERCENTAGE OF THE REVENUES.
>> THAT'S A VERY GOOD POINT.
WE DON'T KNOW WHAT PERCENTAGE OF
REVENUE AMAZON IS GOING TO BE
GETTING.
THE NEW EBOOK AGREEMENT WHICH
GOES IN EFFECT EARLY IN 2015,
WILL ALLOW HACHETTE TO SET ITS
DIGITAL PRICES.
>> Brown: HOW MUCH DID THE
PUSH-BACK FROM WRITERS HURT
AMAZON AND POSSIBLY LEAD TO THIS
AGREEMENT?
>> I THINK IT DINGED AMAZON.
I THINK THAT AMAZON HAS ALWAYS
CONSIDERED ITSELF AN
AUTHOR-FRIENDLY COMPANY, AND I
THINK IT WOUNDED THEM TO SEE
AUTHORS WHOSE CAREERS HAD IT
HELPED CREATE AND PROMOTE AND
PROVIDE FOR ATTACKING THEM AS
BEING HARMFUL TO THEIR WRITING
YEARS.
AND IN MY MIND, THE GROUP DUBBED
AUTHORS WRITING GROUP.
>> Brown: DOUGLAS PRESTON LEAD
THE OCTOBERORS' GROUP AGAINST
AMAZON IN THE FIGHT.
BUT AFTER THE ANNOUNCEMENT HE
SAID HE WAS GLAD ABOUT THE
AGREEMENT BUT, "IF ANYONE THINKS
THIS IS OVER THEY'RE DELUDING
THEMSELVES."
HE SAID AMAZON COVETS MARKET
SHARE THE WAY NAPOLEON COVETED
TERRITORY.
THAT DOES NOT SOUND LIKE HE SEES
A HAPPY CONCLUSION HERE.
>> I THINK ONE THING THE DISPUTE
DISPLAYED PROMINENTLY AND HOW
IMPORTANT AND POWERFUL AMAZON
HAS BECOME ON THE BOOK
PUBLISHING LANDSCAPE.
AMAZON HAS EMERGED AS THE
PREMIERE BOOK RETAILER, AND IT
GIVES THEM A LOT OF CLOUT, AND I
THINK WHAT DOUG IS ADDRESSING IS
THE FACT AMAZON IS GOING TO
CONTINUE TO NEGOTIATE AS HARD AS
IT CAN FOR AS FAVORABLE TERMS AS
IT CAN GET, AND I THINK THAT'S
WHERE HE'S SORT OF POINTING.
>> Brown: AT THE SAME TIME,
THERE WAS ALSO PRESSURE ON
HACHETTE, TOO, RIGHT, FROM ITS
AUTHORS.
>>, OF COURSE,.
>> Brown: ESPECIALLY I GUESS
WITH THE BIG HOLIDAY SEASON
COMING.
>> , OF COURSE.
IT WAS TERRIBLE, I DID SPEAK TO
ONE AUTHOR, GEORGE PELANACONOS,
A CRIME WRITER AND HE'S
RELIEVED.
HE HAS A BOOK BEING PUBLISHED IN
JANUARY.
AMAZON HAS EMERGED AS THE
PREMIERE ONLINE BOOK SELLER.
THEIR CAREERS WERE IN MANY CASES
BEING HURT BECAUSE CONSUMERS
COULDN'T PREORDER THEIR TITLES,
OR YOU'D TRY TO BUY A BOOK AND
AMAZON WOULD SAY IT'S NOT GOING
TO SHIP FOR THREE OR FOUR WEEKS,
AND IT WOULD DISCOURAGE YOU FROM
PERHAPS BUYING THAT TITLE AND
MAYBE YOU'D LOOK FOR ANOTHER
BOOK, AND AMAZON DECIDE NOT TO
DISCOUNT MANY OF THE HACHETTE
TITLES.
ALL OF THAT TOGETHER CREATED A
LOT OF PRESSURE ON HACHETTE.
>> Brown: IN WHAT WAY, IF AT
ALL, DOES THIS IMPACT THE REST
OF US, THE CONSUMERS?
WHERE ARE WE IN ALL OF THIS?
>> I THINK THAT'S SORT OF A
LONGER TERM BATTLE THAT WILL
HAVE TO UNFOLD AS WE SEE HOW
CONSUMER E-BOOK PRICES
FLUCTUATE.
BUT I WOULD SAY FOR THE PRESENT,
FOR CONSUMERS, THIS IS A GOOD
DEAL THAT ALLOWS THEM TO GO BACK
TO ORDERING AND RECEIVING THE
HACHETTE TITLES FROM AUTHORS
THEY LIKE AND ADMIRE IN A
REGULAR WAY.
>> Brown: JEFFRY TRACHTENBERG
OF THE "WALL STREET JOURNAL."
THANK YOU.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Ifill: OVER THE LAST FEW
YEARS, A NUMBER OF ACADEMIC
GAINS HAVE BEEN MADE BY
HISTORICALLY DISADVANTAGED
STUDENTS, INCLUDING AFRICAN-
AMERICANS AND LATINOS.
BUT NATIVE AMERICAN STUDENTS
HAVE LOST GROUND SINCE 2008 WITH
ONLY ABOUT HALF EARNING A
DIPLOMA.
IN ALASKA, AN EFFORT IS UNDERWAY
TO TURN THAT AROUND BY CREATING
MORE TEACHERS WITHIN THE NATIVE
COMMUNITY.
THE NEWSHOUR'S APRIL BROWN
REPORTS AS PART OF OUR "AMERICAN
GRADUATE SERIES.
>> Reporter: ALASKA IS OFTEN
CALLED THE LAST FRONTIER.
A PHRASE THAT SEEMS FITTING FOR
THE TOWN OF DILLINGHAM WHICH
SITS ON A REMOTE INLET NEAR
BRISTOL BAY.
FOR THOUSANDS OF YEARS, THE AREA
HAS BEEN A HUFOR B THE YUP'IK
PEOPLE.
TODAY, MORE THAN 50% OF THE
ROUGHLY 2,000 RESIDENTS ARE
ALASKA NATIVES.
WHO CONTINUE TO SURVIVE ON
SUBSISTENCE TRADITIONS LIKE
FISHING THAT HAVE BEEN PASSED
DOWN THROUGH THE GENERATIONS FOR
FOOD.
HOME ADDRESSES ARE NOT A MUST
HERE BECAUSE EVERYONE PICKS UP
THEIR MAIL AT THE POST OFFICE.
AND WHEN SCHOOL BEGINS IN THE
FALL, FINDI ALANGSKA NATIVE
STUDENTS WHO HAVE GRADUATION
RATES THAT HOVER AROUND 50%
STATEWIDE CAN BE A CHALLENGE.
>> SOMETIMES FAMILIES GO MOOSE
HUNTING IN THE FALL RIGHT WHEN
SCHOOL STARTS AND FAMILIES WILL
TAKE THEIR KIDS AND GO TO MOOSE
CAMP FOR A WEEK SO THEY'LL MISS
A WHOLE WEEK OF SCHOOL.
>> Reporter: ALASKA NATIVE INA
BOUKER HAS BEEN A TEACHER IN
DILLINGHAM'S SCHOOLS FOR MORE
THAN 30 YEARS AND SHE'S WELL
AWARE OF THE CHALLENGES AND THE
LEGACY OF MISTRUST THAT EXISTS
AROUND EDUCATION HERE.
BOUKER WAS RAISED IN THE NEARBY
VILLAGE OF MANAKOTAK AT A TIME
WHEN AMERICAN INDIANS AND ALASKA
NATIVES WERE STILL BEING
EDUCATED BY MOSTLY WHITE
TEACHERS AND TOLD TO SHED THEIR
CULTURAL IDENTITIES.
BOUKER REMEMBERS WELL THAT IF
ANY STUDENTS WERE CAUGHT
SPEAKING YUP'IK.
>> THEN WE HAD A RULER SLAPPED
TO OUR HAND LIKE THIS NOT REAL
HARD BUT YOU KNOW ENOUGH OF A
SLAP TO MAKE US SCARED AND
REMEMBER NOT TO SPEAK YUP'IK.
>> Reporter: BUT EVEN AFTER
THREE DECADES BOUKER REMAINS A
RARITY HERE.
ONLY FIVE PERCENT OF THE STATE'S
TEACHERS ARE ALASKA NATIVES AND
SOME TOWNS AND VILLAGES LOSE
NEARLY A-THIRD OF THEIR TEACHING
STAFF EVERY YEAR.
>> SOME TEACHERS, BRAND NEW
TEACHERS CANNOT HANDLE IT AND
SOME OF THEM LEAVE EVEN AFTER
FIVE DAYS, TWO WEEKS, TWO
MONTHS, SIX MONTHS, BY CHRISTMAS
MOST LEAVE WITHIN A YEAR OR TWO.
ACROSS ALASKA, ROUGHLY THREE OUT
OF FOUR TEACHERS ARE FROM OUT OF
STATE, AND STUDIES HAVE SHOWN
THAT THOSE TEACHERS STAY FOR
SHORTER PERIODS OF TIME THAN
TEACHERS BORN AND RAISED HERE.
THIS, BOUKER SAYS, HAS HAD A
CRIPPLING EFFECT ON STUDENTS.
>> SOME OF OUR STUDENTS START
FEELING LIKE WELL WHY SHOULD I
WORK HARD FOR YOU?
WHY SHOULD I DO THAT ASSIGNMENT
BECAUSE YOU ARE NOT GOING TO BE
HERE ANYWAY NEXT YEAR.
>> Reporter: THERE'S ONLY TWO
REAL WAYS TO GET TO DILLINGHAM,
EITHER BY BOAT OR BY PLANE.
MOST PEOPLE COME BY AIR AND WHEN
YOU GET HERE GAS IS ABOUT $7 A
GALLON AND THERE ARE NO MOVIE
THEATRES OR BIG BOX STORES AND
THOSE ARE SOME OF THE REASONS
IT'S HARD TO KEEP TEACHERS
AROUND.
>> TO TELL A FUNNY STORY A
TEACHER GOT OFF THE PLANE LOOKED
AROUND AND GOT RIGHT BACK ON THE
PLANE AND FLEW HOME.
SO THAT'S HAPPENED HERE.
>> Reporter: WILLIAM SCHWAN IS
THE PRINCIPAL OF DILLINGHAM'S
MIDDLE & HIGH SCHOOL WHICH
SERVES ABOUT 270 KIDS, HE SAYS
THAT HIGH TEACHER TURNOVER IS
NOT HIS ONLY PROBLEM.
ACCORDING TO SCHWAN, SCHOOLS
LIKE HIS NEED TEACHERS WHO KNOW
OR ARE WILLING TO LEARN ABOUT
THE YUP'IK CULTURE AND WAY OF
LIFE, BUT THEY'VE BEEN DIFFICULT
TO FIND.
>> VERY FEW NATIVE CANDIDAS ITE
MEAN VERY FEW.
AND SO IM NOT GOING TO SAY I
ALWAYS LOOK AT THEM FIRST BUT
YOU KNOW IN THE LAST COUPLE OF
YEARS THERE JUST HASN'T BEEN YOU
KNOW A LONG LINE WAITING TO GET
INTO DILLINGHAM WITH FOLKS WHO
ARE FROM THE NATIVE CULTURE OR
YUP'IK CULTURE.
>> Reporter: THAT'S PRECISELY
WHAT INA BOUKER HAS BEEN TRYING
TO CHANGE, IN 2007, SHORTLY
AFTER BEING NAMED ALASKA TEACHER
OF THE YEAR BOUKER BEGAN WRITING
A CURRICULUM FOR A STATEWIDE
PROGRAM KNOWN AS THE FUTURE
EDUCATORS OF ALASKA.
SINCE THEN THE PROGRAM HAS
RECEIVED STATE AND FEDERAL
GRANTS OF MORE THAN $5.5 MILLION
TO COURENAGE LOCAL AND ALASKA
NATIVE STUDENTS TO CONSIDER
CAREERS IN EDUCATION, AND THEN
WORK IN SMALL TOWNS AND VILLAGE
SCHOOLS WHERE THEY'RE
DESPERATELY NEEDED.
>> WE WANTED TO HAVE THE KIDS
EXPLORE ALL THE DIFFERENT JOBS
WITHIN A SCHOOL.
MANY, MANY AREAS NOT ONLY
TEACHING BUT COOKS, JANITORS,
CLASSROOM AIDES, BUS DRIVERS AND
I MEAN THE LIST GOES ON AND ON.
THAT LIST ALSO INCLUDES
ADMINISTRATORS, WHO HAVING GROWN
UP HERE, WOULD LIKELY BE MORE
SENSITIVE TO THE NEEDS OF THE
COMMUNITY AND MORE WILLING TO
STAY.
RICKY LIND JUNIOR IS NOW ONE OF
THEM, CURRENTLY DEAN OF STUDENTS
HE WENT TO DILLINGHAM'S SCHOOLS,
GRADUATED FROM COLLEGE AND FIRST
CAME BACK TO TEACH MUSIC.
>> I'VE SEEN FIVE PRINCIPALS SO
I FELT THAT WITH THE
ADMINISTRATION TURNOVER, I
WANTED TO HELP MY SCHOOL ON A
DIFFERENT LEVEL, THERE AE THINGS
I WANTED TO DO THAT I COULDN'T
DO AS A MUSIC DIRECTOR SO I
THOUGHT THIS WAS THE BEST WAY TO
HELP ON A LARGER SCALE.
>> Reporter: NOW THE EFFORT TO
GROW THEIR OWN EDUCATORS STARTS
EARLY WITH KINDERGARTNERS IN
PART BY INCORPORATING LESSONS ON
NATIVE CUSTOMS AND CULTURE IN
THE CLASSROOM.
THAT, CURRICULUM BOUKER SAYS,
ALSO HAS THE ADDED BENEFIT OF
MAKING SCHOOL MORE RELEVANT TO
EVERYDAY LIFE.
>> YOU ARE GOING TO WRITE ABOUT
SOMETHING YOU HAVE DONE WITHIN
SUBSISTENCE THE LAST MONTH.
THAT IS A MOTIVATION BECAUSE
THEY ARE THE EXPERT IN THAT
PARTICULAR TOPIC NOT THE FIRST
YEAR TEACHER WHO DOESN'T KNOW
ANYTHING ABOUT HUNTING MOOSE.
>> Reporter: CURRENT STUDENTS IN
THE PROGRAM, INCLUDING
DILLINGHAM SENIOR SASSA WILLIAMS
EARN BOTH HIGH SCHOOL AND
COLLEGE CREDIT ACCEPTED BY
LASKAA'S PUBLIC UNIVERSITIES.
>> WILLIAMS HELPS HER GRANDPA
THROW FISH INTO BACK OF TRUCK
SASSA AND HER FAMILY ARE YUP'IK
AND LIKE THEIR FOREFATHERS RELY
HEAVILY UPON FISHING, HUNTING
AND PICKING BERRIES FOR FOOD.
>> Reporter: INA BOUKER HAS BEEN
SASSA'S TEACHER ON AND OFF SINCE
KINDERGARTEN.
>> IT IS DEFINITELY NICE HAVING
THAT TEACHER YOU'VE GROWN UP
WITH AND BEING ABLE TO TALK TO
THEM ABOUT THINGS OTHER THAN
SCHOOL.
I CAN GO UP TO INA AND TELL HER
I'M HAVING PROBLEMS WITH THIS
AND THIS AND BE TOTALLY
COMFORTABLE ABOUT IT AND THEN
THERE ARE SOME TEACHERS IN THE
SCHOOL WHO I NEVER IN A MILLION
YEARS YOU KNOW TELL THEM ABOUT
MY PROBLEMS, SO ITS REALLY NICE
HAVING THAT RELATIONSHIP WITH
HER.
SHE IS ACTUALLY ONE OF THE
REASONS IM THINKING ABOUT
BECOMING A TEACHER.
>> Reporter: LORRENE CHIKLAK WAS
ALSO MENTORED BY BOUKER IN
DILLINGHAM.
SHE GRADUATED FROM HIGH-SCHOOL
LAST YEAR AND IS STUDYING
ELEMENTARY EDUCATION  AT THE
UNIVERSITY OF ALASKA-ANCHORAGE.
NOW A SOPHOMORE, CHIKLAK SAYS
THERE WERE TIMES IN HIGH SCHOOL
THAT SHE STRUGGLED ACADEMICALLY
AND CALLS BOUKER A HERO FOR
GETTING HER TO GRADUATION AND
WHERE SHE IS TODAY.
SHE NOW WANTS TO BECOME A
TEACHER FOR ONE SIMPLE REASON.
>> WHEN YOU SEE A CHILD
STRUGGLING TO UNDERSTAND
SOMETHING AND TO REALLY TEACH
THEM TO UNDERSTAND IT AND THEN
THEY FINALLY GET IT THE LOOK ON
THE FACE IS PRICELESS LIKE WHOA
I FINALLY UNDERSTAND SOMETHING
THAT I DID NOT UNDERSTAND
BEFORE.
>> Reporter: ON A LARGER SCALE,
THE PROBLEMS AROUND BOOSTING
ACADEMIC PERFORMANCE AND
GRADUATION RATES AMONG AMERICAN
INDIANS AND NATIVE ALASKANS
REMAIN NUMEROUS AND COMPLEX.
BUT AHNIWAKE ROSE, THE EXECUTIVE
DIRECTOR FOR THE NATIONAL INDIAN
EDUCATION ASSOCIATION IN
WASHINGTON D.C., SAYS THE EFFORT
TO GROW NATIVE TEACHERS IS A
GOOD START.
>> YOU KNOW IT'S TIME FOR US TO
REALLY STAND UP AND SAY YOU KNOW
WHAT WE'RE GOING TO TAKE BACK
THE INHERENT RIGHT THAT WE HAVE
TO EDUCATE OUR OWN CITIZENS.
WE KNOW THAT OUR STUDENTS ARE
GOING TO DO BETTER WHEN THEY
HAVE THOSE FACES AND SIMILAR
CULTURAL EXPERIENCES.
THAT'S NOT JUST IN INDIAN
COUNTRY THOUGH THAT'S ACROSS THE
BOARD RIGHT WE'VE SEEN THE SAME
MOVEMENT IN AFRICAN AMERICAN
COMMUNITIES, THE SAME MOVEMENTS
IN LATINO COMMUNITIES.
>> Reporter: AND FOR INA BOUKER,
SHE SAYS SHE'S GLAD THAT
STUDENTS LIKE SASSA AND LORRENE
ARE CONSIDERING COMING BACK TO
DILLINGHAM TO CONTINUE THE WORK
SHE'S STARTED.
>> I FEEL THAT I'VE COMPLETED MY
CIRCLE AND IM READY TO PASS THE
TORCH TO SOMEONE ELSE WHO WILL
POSSIBLY DO A WAY BETTER JOB
THAN ME.
>> Woodruff: AMERICAN GRADUATE
IS A PUBLIC MEDIA INITIATIVE
FUNDED BY THE CORPORATION FOR
PUBLIC BROADCASTING.
>> Ifill: NOW, THE RISKY
BUSINESS OF WORKING AT THE
WORLD'S HIGHEST PEAK.
HARI SREENIVASAN REVISITS A
TRAGEDY EARLIER THIS YEAR ON
MOUNT EVEREST.
>> Sreenivasan: LAST MONTH IN
THE HIMALAYAN MOUNTAIN A FREAK
BLIZZARD CAUGHT TREKKERS OFF
GUARD, KILLING 40 PEOPLE, HALF
NEPALESE.
AND THAT DISASTER CAME WHAT WAS
ALREADY A TERRIBLE YEAR FOR
MOUNTAINEERING IN NEPAL.
ON APRIL 18, 16 SHERPAS WERE
KILLED IN AN AVALANCHE ON MOUNT
EVEREST.
IT WAS THE WORST SINGLE LOSS OF
LIFE IN THE MOUNTAIN'S HISTORY,
AND IT SHOCKED THE CLIMBING
COMMUNITY.
MANY ARE ASKING HARD QUESTONSI
NOW ABOUT WHAT SHERPAS DO AND
HOW THEY'RE COMPENSATED FOR
THEIR WORK.
THE DISASTER AND ITS AFTERMATH
ARE RECOUNTED IN THE "NATIONAL
GEOGRAPHIC'S" NOVEMBER EDITION
IN A STORY CALLED, "SORROW ON
THE MOUNTAIN."
HERE TO TELL US MORE IS ITS
AUTHOR, CHIP BROWN.
WHAT HAPPENED ON APRIL 18?
>> ON APRIL 18, AROUND 6:45 IN
THE MORNING, SEVERAL-- AS MANY
AS 100 SHERPAS WERE ON THEIR WAY
UP TO THE KHUMBU ICEFALL, WHERE
THE TRAIL GOES NEAR THE SIDE OF
THIS GORGE, UPWARDS OF 30
MILLION POUNDS OF ICE FELL OUT
OF A HANGING GLACIER, AND 16 OF
THEM REMEMBER KILLED.
>> Sreenivasan: YOU SAID 100
OF THEM.
IT'S HARD TO IMAGINE A TRAFFIC
JAM, A CROWD OF PEOPLE.
>> YEAH, THERE WAS A VERY BIG
TRAFFIC JAM WHERE THEY HAD TO
DOWN-CLIMB THESE LADDERS.
GOINGHROU TGH THE KHUMBU ICEFALL
SAYS LABYRINTH OF ICE FORMATIONS
AND CREVASSES.
THERE ARE LADDERS THAT GO UP
THESE CLIFFS THAT ARE SOMETIMES
AS BIG AS 10-STORY BUILDINGS.
AND THEY GO ACROSS CREVASSES AND
THEY HAVE TO DOWN-CLIMB, SO IT
CAN BE A VERY ELABORATE TRIP.
>> Sreenivasan: MOST OF THESE
SHERPAS ARE CARRYING GEAR FOR
THE CLIMBERS.
>> UPWARDS OF 100 FOUND.
>> Sreenivasan: SOME OF IT IS
FURNITURE, AND EPRESSO MACHINES
AND HEATED CARPETS.
>> IN THIS CASE THEY WERE
CARRYING DINING TENT, CHAIRS,
COOKING POTS.
I HEARD ONE STORY ABOUT A SHERPA
WHO WAS ABLE TO SHELTER HIMSELF
FROM THE ICE BEHIND A LARGE MOMO
POT, WHICH IS A POT THEY MAKE
SHERPA DUMP LINGS IN.
THEY WERE CARRYING GEAR FOR
THEIR CLEENTS AND THEIR OWN
GEAR, ALSO.
>> Sreenivasan: SOME PEOPLE
ARE GOING TO LISTEN TO THIS
STORY AND SAY, WELL, THERE'S
ALWAYS RISK INVOLVED IN
MOUNTAINEERING.
WHY IS IT THAT THIS CLIMB AND
THIS TRAGEDY IS SPARKING A
CONVERSATION IN THE NEPALESE
COMMUNITY, IN THE SHERPA
COMMUNITY?
>> I THINK BECAUSE SO MANY
PEOPLE DIED AT ONCE.
THERE HAVE BEEN ONLY BEEN THREE
FAMOUS YEARS WHERE THERE WERE,
LIKE, GROUP DEATHS, AND NONE OF
THEM WERE BIGGER THAN LAST YEAR.
IT'S NOT UNUSUAL FOR ONE OR TWO
SHERPAS TO DIE IN THE COURSE OF
A CLIMBING SEASON.
YOU HAVE AS MANY AS 300 PEOPLE
GOING UP THE MOUNT KNOW IN ANY
ONE CLIMBING SEASON NOW.
SOME WESTERNERS DIE.
EIRTH BODIES ARE STILL UP THERE.
SHERPAS ARE PRETTY GOOD AT
TAKING CARE OF THEMSELVES AT
HIGH ALTITUDE BUT THIS IS WHAT
THEY CALL-- THE CHUM COUP IS
WHAT THEY CALL OBJECTIVE DANGERS
AND THERE'S NOTHING YOU CAN DO.
>> Sreenivasan: DO YOU THINK
WILL CHANGE THE CLIMBING
CULTURE?
YOU SAID IN YOUR REPORTING SOME
OF THESE SHERPAS WERE GETTING
$415 FROM THE NEPALESE
GOVERNMENT IN COMPENSATION,
BARELY ENOUGH TO COVER A
FUNERAL.
>> THAT WAS THE FIRST OFFER FROM
THE NEPAL GOVERNMENT, THEIR
EMERGENCY FUND.
THEY HAVE INCREASED THEIR
INSURANCE EXPRAETS THEY'RE
GETTING MORE MONEY FOR
INSURANCE.
SHERPA COMPENSATION HAS GOTTEN
BETTER OVER THE YEARS.
IRONICALLY, IT'S THE WESTERN--
MOST OF THE WESTERN GUIDING
COMPANIES THAT PAY MORE MONEY
THAN SOME OF THE LOCALLY OWNED
COMPANIES.
THIS IS AN IMMENSE AMOUNT OF
INCOME FOR SOME PEOPLE.
IT'S THEIR YEAR'S WORTH OF
INCOME.
IT'S HARD TO SEE THEM NOT GOING
BACK.
THERE ARE SHERPAS I TALKED TO
WHO SAID I'LL NEVER POUT
CRAMPONS AGAIN.
THAT WAS-- THEY JUST HAVE LOST
TOO MANY PEOPLE.
THERE ARE MOTHERS THAT HAVE LOST
MORE THAN ONE SON.
AS SOMEBODY ONCE SAID, NO SHERPA
WIFE IS COMFORTABLE WHEN HER
HUSBAND IS ON THE MOUNTAIN."
BUT THIS IS-- HAS BROUGHT AN
ENORMOUS WEALTH TO THE SHERPA
COMMUNITY.
AND THAT WEALTH HAS PRODUCED ALL
KINDS OF ANCILLARY BENEFITS--
EDUCATION, SENDING-- SHERPAS
HAVE MIGRATED ALL OVER THE
WORLD.
ONE OF THE LARGEST SHERPA
POPULATIONS IS IN NEW YORK CITY.
SHERPAS SEND THEIR KIDS TO
BOARDING SCHOOL.
THEY TAKE THE RISKS BASICALLY TO
BETTER THEMSELVES.
THERE ARE NOT A LOT OF OTHER
ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITIES IN THE
KHUMBU WHERE THEY LIVE.
>> Brown: CHIP BROWN.
THE STORY IS CALLED "SOR ROW ON
THE MOUNTAIN" IN THE NOVEMBER
ISSUE OF "NATIONAL GEOGRAPHIC."
THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Woodruff: FINALLY TONIGHT, WE
HIGHLIGHT AN AMBITOUS NEW
PROJECT WITH TWO UNLIKELY HEROES
AND ZOMBIES.
THE NEWSHOUR'S MIKE MELIA
REPORTS.
>> DO YOU LIKE SKATEBOARDING?
>> YES, I DO.
>> WHY?
>> IT REPRESENTS MY WILD SIDE.
>> Reporter: THESE YOUNG MEN
HAVE A STORY TO TELL.
>> IT'S GOING TO BE LIKE BETWEEN
HORROR AND COMEDY, DRAMA KIND OF
THING.
>> WE HAVE EVER AVERAGE,
EVERYDAY TEEN DRAMA, LIKE
HEARTBREAKS OR BETRAYALS OR
PEOPLE LIVING--
>> OR IT COULD BE A TEENAGER'S
SECRET LIFE.
>> WHAT I DO TO MATTIE SI LEAVE
HIM BEHIND.
>> YEAH
>> AND THAT IS NOT COOL.
>> YOU CAN'T LEAVE A FRIEND
BEHIND.
>> Reporter: SAM AND MATTIE
ARE BEST FRIEND.
BOTH HAVE DOWN SYNDROME.
THEY FIRST MET AT THE SPECIAL
OLYMPS WHICEN THEY WERE IN GRADE
SCHOOL COMPETIN COMPETING IN TRD
FIELD EVENTS.
NOW, MATTIE IS 19 AND HAS
FINISHED HIGH SCHOOL.
SAM IS 18 AND A SENIOR.
THEY LIVE IN PROVIDENCE, RHODE
ISLAND.
THREE YEARS AGO THEY HAD AN
IDEA-- LET'S MAKE A TEEN ZOMBIE
MOVIE.
AND IT STUCK.
>> Reporter: WITH THE HELP OF
THEIR FAMILIES, SAM AND MATTIE
TURNED TO A RELATIVELY NEW
SOURCE OF FUNDING FOR IDEAS TO
PLAC THEIR DREAM A REALITY.
IN JUST FIVE YEARS, ONLINE
CROWDFUNDING SITES LIKE
KICKSTARTER, GO FUND ME, OR INDY
GOGO, HAVE HELPED RAISED
BILLIONS OF DOLLARS FOR TENS OF
THOUSANDS OF PROJECTS.
A CAMPAIGN ON INDY GOGO RAISED
MORE THAN $700,000 IN A MONTH TO
GIVE BUS DRIVER KAREN KLEIN A
VACATION AFTER VIDEO OF HER
BEING BULLIED BY STUDENTS WENT
VIRAL.
>> I HAD A LOT OF RESERVATIONS S
ABOUT PUTTING IT OUNL.
>> Reporter: JEALOUSY SWRUK
MAN IS SAM'S OLDER BROTHER.
HE PUT TOGETHER THEIR
KICKSTARTER CAMPAIGN.
>> I DON'T REMEMBER THE FIRST
TIME THEY TOLD ME ABOUT IT.
IT WAS SOMETHING SAM TALKED
ABOUT A LOT, BUT WHEN WE WENT ON
TO YEAR TOO 2 AND HE STARTED
TALKING ABOUT SCENES AND I
STARTED ASKING MORE QUESTIONS
ABOUT IT.
AND I KEPT HEARING THE SAME
SCENES COME UP.
AND I SAID, "DO YOU HAVE A PLOT
FOR THIS WORKED OUT?"
AND HE DID.
AND I THINK I REALIZE BFERRED WE
TRIED TO DO IT IN A D.I.Y. WAY
IT MIGHT BE BEST TO START AND GO
BIG.
>> Reporter: THEY WERE ON A
MISSION TO RAISE $50,000 TO FUND
THE MOVIE AND A DOCUMENTARY OF
THE MAKING OF THE FILM.
STJU TODAY, THEY REACHED THEIR
GOAL, THANKS TO SOME HELP ALONG
THE WAY.
ON HALLOWEEN, KICKSTARTER NAMED
SAM AND MATTIE THEIR PROJECT OF
THE DAY, AND FELLOW RHODE ISLAND
FILM MAKERS, THE FARRELLY
BROTHERS, BEHIND COMEDY HITS
LIKE "DUMB AND DUMBER" AND
"SOMETHING ABOUT MARY "HAVE
SHOWN SUPPORT ON TWITTER.
WHEN WE VISITED SAM'S FAMILY'S
HOUSE, THEY TOOK ME TO SAM'S
ROOM TO SHOW ME THE PLOT THEY
HAVE LAID OUT AND THE
STORYBOARDS THEY'VE DRAWN.
>> MY FAVORITE IS RIGHT HERE.
"SAVES KID FROM BULLY."
IT'S LIKE, THIS KID IS BEING
BULLY, AND MATTIE RIDE LIKE A
BIKE, AND HE-- SKATEBOARDERS DO
COOL TRICKS LIKE FLIPS.
>> IT'S GOINGS TO BE A GREAT
MOVIE.
IT REALLY IS.
THERE IS A COLLEGE MONTAGE.
WE GO TO COLLEGE AND THERE'S A
HUGE SCENE WHERE WE'RE HAVING A
HUGE COLLEGE FRAT PARTY.
>> Reporter: IT'S PROJECTS
LIKE THIS THAT ALLOW SAM AND
MATTIE FOCUS THEIR IDEAS AND
THEIR ENERGY.
IT ALSO OFFERS THEIR FAMILIES A
CHANCE TO CONNECT WITH THEIR
CREATIVITY.
>> IT'S BEEN A WAY TO FOCUS
EVERYTHING THAT THEY LIKE INTO
ONE THING, AND IT STARTED OUT
SORT OF AS A FANTASY, BUT THEN
IT GOT VERY REAL.
>> CHRIS SUCCMAN IS SAM'S DAD.
>> SAM AND MATTHEW ARE VERY
HONEST PEOPLE, AND I THINK
THAT'S PART OF WHAT MAKES THIS
WONDERFUL IS THAT THEY'RE SO
HONEST AND IT'S NOT CONTRIVED OR
PRETENTIOUS.
IT'S JUST REALLY THEM.
AND IT'S OBVIOUS THAT THEY BOTH
HAVE A DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITY.
THEY HAVE DOWN SYNDROME, BUT IT
JUST SHOWS THAT THAT REALLY
DOESN'T MATTER.
>> Reporter: A VARIETY OF
PROGRAMS AROUND THE COUNTRY
OFFER PEOPLE WITH DEVELOPMENTAL
DISABILITIES OPPORTUNITIES TO
EXPRESS THEMSELVES CREATIVELY.
FROM MUSIC TO PAINTING TO
ACTING, A MAJOR GENERATIONAL
SHIFT FROM THE OPPORTUNITIES OF
THAT THE DISABLED FACED JUST A
FEW DECADES AGO.
>> SAM HAS ALWAYS INSPIRED ME
NOT BECAUSE OF DOWN SYNDROME AT
ALL.
JUST BECAUSE OF WHO HE IS.
AND I THINK THAT'S ALWAYS BEEN
THE THING THAT I'VE TRIED TO
CONVEY TO PEOPLE IS THAT IT
ALMOST HAS NOTHING TO DO WITH
IT.
SAM IS JUST A TOTALLY AWESOME
DUDE, AND IT'S NOT, YOU KNOW,
WHAT'S-- WHAT'S AMAZING ABOUT
HIM IS HIM AND HIS IDEAS -- A
LOT OF PEOPLE ARE LIKE, "YOUR
BROTHER IS SO MUCH COOLER THAN
YOU."
AND I'M LIKE I KNOW, AND HE
ALWAYS REMIND ME OF IT, AND HE
REMIND ME THAT HE'S A BETTER
DANCER.
AND I THINK ALL THOSE THINGS ARE
TRUE.
I AM HIS OLDER BROTHER BUT I
HAVE ALWAYS BEEN IN AWE OF HIM.
>> Reporter: SAM AND MATTIE
LOVE THE CAMERA AND AREN'T SHY
ABOUT THEIR AMBITIONS.
>> I WANT TO BE FAMOUS BECAUSE I
WANT TO BE A D.J.
LOVE TO SING.
>> I WANT TO BE FAMOUS BECAUSE I
>> HE HAS A GOOD VOICE.
LOVE TO SING.
>> I'M A SINGER AND I CAN RAP,
>> HE HAS A GOOD VOICE.
TOO.
>> I'M A SINGER AND I CAN RAP,
I'LL DO A LITTLE RAP.
TOO.
>> Reporter: I'D LOVE TO HEAR
I'LL DO A LITTLE RAP.
IT.
>> Reporter: I'D LOVE TO HEAR
YOY, HE'S LIKE A TEENAGE,
IT.
WHAT'S UP.
YOY, HE'S LIKE A TEENAGE,
YOU CAN'T SEE ME I GOT
WHAT'S UP.
SWAGGER.
YOU CAN'T SEE ME I GOT
YO, CHECK IT.
SWAGGER.
YO, YEAH
YO, CHECK IT.
>> THEY HAVE A WISH LIST OF
YO, YEAH
CELEBRITY CAMEOS THEY HOPE TO
>> THEY HAVE A WISH LIST OF
INCLUDE IN THR FIEILM FROM THE
CELEBRITY CAMEOS THEY HOPE TO
ROCK TO THE "JERSEY SHORE'S"
INCLUDE IN THR FIEILM FROM THE
D.J.PAULEY D., AND THEY WANT
ROCK TO THE "JERSEY SHORE'S"
MANY OF THE POP STARS WHO LINE
D.J.PAULEY D., AND THEY WANT
SAM'S WALLS.
MANY OF THE POP STARS WHO LINE
>> NO BIEBER.
SAM'S WALLS.
HE'S CREATE CRAZYIN THE HEAD.
>> NO BIEBER.
>> Reporter: SAM AND MATTIE
HE'S CREATE CRAZYIN THE HEAD.
HAVE LINED UP FAMILY FRIENDS TO
>> Reporter: SAM AND MATTIE
FILM AND DIRECT THE FILM.
>> Woodruff: WOW.
>> Ifill: THOSE KIDS ARE
AMAZING.
THEY SAY THEY HAVE SWAGGER.
THEY REALLY DO.
>> Woodruff: THEY SURE DO.
THAT'S JUST-- JUST A GREAT
STORY.
THANK YOU, MIKE.
>> Woodruff: ON OUR FACEBOOK
PAGE WATCH SAM AND MATTIE READ
AN OSCAR-STYLE LIST OF ALL THE
PEOPLE THEY DON'T WANT TO FORGET
IF THEY BECOME FAMOUS.
>> Ifill: AGAIN, THE MAJOR
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE DAY,
PRESIDENT OBAMA AND REPUBLICANS
IN CONGRESS MOVED CLOSER TO
CONFRONTATION OVER IMMIGRATION
REFORM.
"THE NEW YORK TIMES" REPORTED
THE PRESIDENT MAY ACT NEXT WEEK
TO SHIELD UP TO FIVE MILLION
PEOPLE FROM DEPORTATION.
AND THE "ISLAMIC STATE" LEADER,
APPARENTLY ALIVE AND WELL, WAS
HEARD FROM FOR THE FIRST TIME
SINCE IRAQ CLAIMED HE'D BEEN
KILLED IN AN AIR STRIKE.
HE URGED HIS FOLLOWERS TO FIGHT
TO THE END.
>> Woodruff: ON THE NEWSHOUR
ONLINE RIGHT NOW, AT THE SAME
TIME THAT GLOBALIZATION IMPROVES
LIVES ACROSS THE WORLD, IT
CARRIES CERTAIN RISKS TO OUR
HEALTH, CLIMATE AND ECONOMY.
AND THERE'S NO WAY TO MITIGATE
THOSE WITHOUT NATIONAL SUPPORT
FOR INTERGOVERNMENTAL
ORGANIZATIONS, ARGUES IAN
GOLDIN, AUTHOR OF "THE BUTTERFLY
DEFECT."
READ HIS GUEST COLUMN ON OUR
MAKING SENSE PAGE.
ALL THAT AND MORE IS ON OUR WEB
SITE, pbs.org/newshour.
>> Ifill: AND THAT'S THE
NEWSHOUR FOR TONIGHT.
ON FRIDAY, WE'LL SIT DOWN WITH
COMEDIAN JON STEWART TO DISCUSS
HIS NEW SERIOUS FILM.
I'M GWEN IFILL.
>> Woodruff: AND I'M JUDY
WOODRUFF.
JOIN US ON-LINE AND AGAIN HERE
TOMORROW EVENING WITH MARK
SHIELDS AND DAVID BROOKS.
FOR ALL OF US HERE AT THE PBS
NEWSHOUR, THANK YOU AND GOOD
NIGHT.